Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, or
ARDS,
is a life-threatening condition where the
lungs become severely inflamed,
leading to fluid-filled alveoli and
impaired gas exchange.
The key problem is not airway obstruction,
it's oxygenation failure.
ARDS is triggered by direct or indirect
lung injury such as pneumonia,
sepsis, aspiration, or trauma.
These insults damage the alveolar
capillary membrane, causing increased permeability.
Fluid leaks into the alveoli, surfactant
is disrupted,
and the lungs become stiff and difficult
to ventilate.
Clinically, patients present with
rapid-onset dyspnea,
hypoxemia that does not improve easily
with oxygen, and increased
work of breathing.
As the condition progresses, oxygenation
worsens due to shunt,
where blood passes through the without
being properly oxygenated.
Diagnosis is guided by the Berlin
criteria, which include acute
onset, bilateral infiltrates on chest
imaging,
and a reduced P over F ratio.
Severity is classified as mild, moderate,
or severe based on how low that ratio is.
Management focuses on supporting
oxygenation while preventing further lung injury.
This is where respiratory therapists play
a critical role.
Lung protective ventilation is essential,
using low tidal volumes to
reduce overdistension and
ventilator-induced lung injury.
PEEP is used to keep alveoli open and
improve oxygenation.
If hypoxemia persists, escalation
strategies are required.
One of the most important is prone
positioning.
By turning the patient onto their stomach,
we improve ventilation-
perfusion matching and recruit posterior
lung regions, which often leads
to significant improvement in oxygenation.
In severe cases, patients may require
paralysis,
deep sedation, or even ECMO if
conventional strategies fail.
A critical concept for boards and clinical
practice is recognizing deterioration.
Rising carbon dioxide, worsening
hypoxemia, or
signs of fatigue indicate impending
respiratory failure and require immediate escalation.
The respiratory therapist's role is
central, monitoring oxygenation,
adjusting ventilator settings, evaluating
response to therapy,
and identifying when the patient is
improving or declining.
In summary, ARDS is a problem of
oxygenation caused by
diffuse lung injury.
Management requires careful balance,
supporting gas exchange while protecting the
lungs from further harm.